From 1999 to the present, we have greatly diminished the number of products that we transfuse.
Can we do better?
Absolutely.
There are many centers that still transfuse too much.
Our surgeons got incredibly fantastic about doing procedures differently, advanced technology
to do procedures that now didn't require blood transfusion.
All of this has benefited the vast majority of patients in not just the individuals of
religious beliefs who don't want to be transfused, but also patients who we recognize that
transfusion may not be the right answer to their problem.
In 2008, we were using 18,000 red cells per year, and we now are just sneaking under
10,000.
So it's a dramatic reduction in the amount of blood that was transfused.
We can easily identify anemia before the start of the surgery.
And sure that it is well treated without blood products right from the start.
And afterwards, potentially go through the surgery without transfusion.
The key to managing witness patients who are pregnant is planning.
It's crucial, and you can't really take care of any patient, but particularly a witness
patient without a plan.
You know, they have pregnancies like anyone else.
So they're not particularly at risk.
On my birthing record, I put it in big, and it's on the top of the paper.
And I want people to understand that these are the wishes of the patient.
Be aware of it.
Be sensitive to it and be prepared to deal very quickly if there's any concern of blood
loss or developing or evolving postpartum hemorrhage or hemorrhage at any point in the delivery
process.
And you've blood's not an option, obviously, we have to get more creative.
If we have a Jehovah's Witness patient that's coming in to deliver often percent patients
that are very complex, they may have some risk factors for having a major postpartum
hemorrhage identified before they deliver.
We have a case conference with everybody involved in the care of that patient, and we come
up with a strategy of what we do before, what we do during delivery, and what we're going
to do after.
And it's a multifaceted, multidisciplinary team approach to managing those patients.
We just have everything ready to go.
We embrace the idea that we should treat respectfully the wishes of the Jehovah's Witness patients.
There's actually a bit of controversy about whether or not patient blood management improves
patient outcomes, but there are some pretty large studies from the United States in cardiac
surgery, particularly showing that the outcomes are at least as good.
And possibly better with patient blood management.
So certainly, there's no harm in trying to use a blood avoidance strategy.
They have not found that there to be any difference in the outcome of witness patients
and non-witness patients.
There was absolutely no reason to be afraid of the surgery and a witness patient.
In my experience is that the result are the same.
This the other day, I was doing a fairly complex patient, a complex operation in a Jehovah's
Witness patient, and something that's not really been described very frequently where we
actually cool the patient down.
We actually sanguine the patient into a moving circuit in order to see the operative
feel in a very clear area.
I mean, that's a pretty massive shifting of volume, and we were able to do it in a blood
manner in terms of transfusions.
So I think we embrace the fact that there are many complex cases we can do.
I've only had positive experience.
I haven't had negative experiences.
I think the biggest part is communication.